# Developing a Side Project: Laying the Foundations

## Introduction

Like anyone in the field of computer science, especially as a developer, I've always had ideas that I wanted to
develop—the famous "side project" of all developers. Even though, in my case, the goal is not necessarily financial but
rather to explore the facets of creating a software product. As developers, we are mostly fascinated by the technical
aspects of the project—what technologies to use? What type of architecture should I choose? In short, a bunch of
questions that remain important. However, we often overlook the most crucial part: the features of our product and the
path to realize it.

What I write may not be the case for everyone; it mainly applies to me, but perhaps you can relate. I've started
projects, created proof of concepts (POCs), pushed code to GitHub, only to abandon them because I didn't know how to
structure them properly. After several years as a consultant/developer, during which I had the opportunity to work on
various projects, deliver value, create a product with the team, and have generally satisfied users, I began to ask
myself: Why can't I do it alone? It may seem arrogant at first, as you don't build a team by yourself. Beyond the human
aspect of a team pushing you forward and giving your best, I realized that the crucial missing part in my skill set is
organizing myself.

In my consulting missions, I am guided by a Product Owner (PO) or a project manager. We have Jira/Mantis/Redmine tickets
to assign tasks and track their progress. The PO is a central element in a developer's life, something we often take for
granted. But when you work on a project for a client without a PO, who's providing a clearly defined and well-cut requirement,
it becomes a bit complicated.

I digress a bit; let's get back to the main topic. We've seen that the problem comes from the lack of structure and an
overly technical view of the product. To remedy this, I challenged myself to write a series of tasks to start the "side
project." The first task was to document the functional part, and the second would be more focused on the technical
documentation.

To avoid biting off more than I can chew, I decided to limit the product I want to develop to a Minimum Viable Product (
MVP). I narrowed down the features I need to include to deliver in approximately one quarter, and then I will add
features as needed.

## Tooling

Like any developer, I don't like to spend money, so tools like Jira, even though I'm used to them, were out of the
question. After some research, I realized that GitHub offers a project space with quite interesting features, and it
aligned perfectly with what I was looking for.

My goal was to have:

- A backlog where I create the tasks I need to do.
- A Kanban board to track the progress of these tasks.
- A roadmap to help set milestones to meet for completing the previously created tasks.

The icing on the cake is that you can link a project to a repository, and a task can be attached to a pull request.
Thus, closing the pull request also closes the associated task like magic. Task tracking becomes part of the development
process itself, unlike Jira, for example, where we have to move our tickets through the workflow.

## Conclusion

So, my goal for this first week is to write a first draft of the functional documentation. This documentation will
mainly list the main features of the product and the scope of the MVP. This first step will be the foundation, as from
this list of features, I will write the next tickets and define the roadmap for the implementation.

As I write these lines, I've created about ten tasks, and I will document this little adventure. I'm only at the
beginning, but I feel that I will make good progress if I start on solid ground.